Start with Kelly.
No problem. Thank you very much. Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission
and for being here in person.
Uh, we've got 10 minutes to hear from you,
and so please feel free to use as much of that time
or leave some time for questions.
Cool. Over to you. Thank you, Kiara. Um, Kar.
So my name is Kelly Shanks
and I am the Chief Executive Officer of Sport AWA two.
Thanks very much for having me here today.
Um, I'm re representing Sport Manawa two, um, along
with some of our regional sporting organizations
and clubs across Ton North UA, Tara and Rural Manawa two.
Obviously you can take my submission as rad,
but I would like to acknowledge the previous submissions
today, including Martin Snedden Royal Ballet nz,
SGHC, supergroup and PGF
and PGF, who clearly articulated harm.
And I refer any references
or questions on harm, uh, to their submission
as they articulated this way better than I ever could.
I would like to note that the evidence
provided by Martin Snedden to the select committee,
which supports the information I'm about to talk to.
So what he supplied shows
that there's ample incredible evidence
and research to confirm that the risk
of a regulated online casa uh,
casino gambling market in New Zealand cannibalizes
land-based class four revenues, and
therefore funding to communities is real and serious.
Right now, class four grants are the backbone of sport
and recreation and r Rohe.
Of course, we definitely welcome better models,
but none exist today
that can replace the $5 million in r Rohe alone in the last
year until there's a genuine alternative.
Removing this funding without a replacement just means
that Tamari and Rangi Ranta children
and youth are missing out.
So locally across our region. What does that mean?
Well, this funding pays for uniforms in Foxton.
It covers whole hire in Danburg
and buys equipment for kids teams
and fielding this funding also
supports kids learning to swim.
It keeps our sports facilities maintained
and our coaches supported without these funds.
The reality is simple
Junior rugby clubs in Lavin would face doubling their fees.
Netball competitions in rural tararua, we'd struggle
to go ahead and 132 tamari at school
would've missed out on the bike track.
That now gives them a safe place to ride a bike.
So this is not an optional extra, it's
what makes sport possible for thousands of children
and families across our Ohio.
The proposed online casino gambling bill up
to 15 offshore casino operators,
but unlike Class four, it doesn't require them
to return a single dollar to the community.
That means offshore operators profit.
Our regions lose out and clubs in places like er, Shannon
and ATU where there are very few funding options are left.
Stranded Minister Brooke Van Felden has acknowledged this
gap, but argues
that requiring community funding could create a perverse
incentive with respect.
That position leaves our towns
and our cities worse off than they are today.
This undermines the very purpose
of the gambling Act 2003, which is very clear.
It was designed to ensure
that money from gambling benefits the community
and to give communities a voice in decisions about gambling.
This bill breaks with nearly 50 years
of principle in New Zealand's law
and the scale of what at risk is undeniable.
In 2024,
more than 8 million in class four funding was distributed
across our region alone.
With 66% of that going directed to sport,
that's over $5 million potentially gone if this bill goes
ahead without any change,
and the sinking lid policy continues.
So sports are already feeling the pressures.
These are quotes from some
of our regional sporting organizations
that we met with last week.
I've got five quotes. We teach 5,000 children
to swim each year, but without funding,
we could only reach half of them.
In a country that is surrounded by water,
that's a risk we simply can't take.
Our organization has seen cost jump up
by 9,000 this year alone without gaming grants
that shortfall gets passed directly onto families
and they just can't afford it.
If funding keeps shrinking,
kids in rural tarot will have fewer opportunities to play.
When sport is taken away, the risk of crime
and poor health outcomes they rise.
Sport is more than just games.
It keeps young people safe,
it keeps 'em connected and active.
Without the support, our communities will pay the price.
And lastly, we have seen a 30% decline in our funding.
We might have to shut our doors if
offshore casinos take market share
but then return nothing the kids miss out.
As families can't afford the rising costs that we'll follow,
the impact on facilities will be a mass.
And I do ask you who will maintain
these facilities going forward?
The long-term result, only those who can afford
to play sport will get to play sport.
This will have a cascading effect around health
and wellbeing for the country.
We are not opposing regulation, in fact, we support it,
but regulation must protect the very communities
who were shoulder the social cost.
We urge the committee to embed the community benefit
principle bill into this bill's purpose consistent
with the gambling Act 2003, we ask
that you ring fence a percentage of online go
and casino profits for community distribution
and of course keep the system accessible.
So a small rugby club
or a school in Shannon as same shot of funding
as a large organization in Auckland.
I'm certainly not an expert in the bill,
but I can talk about community sport impact
and the negative impact this bill would have
with over four seven, sorry.
With over 17,010
to 19 year olds taking part in organized sport across our
rugby in a seven day period, the love
of sport is definitely high.
Without gaming funding,
it will be our most vulnerable populations who will miss out
as they will not be able to afford to take part in sport.
In ape that is Maori Pacifica multicultural community
and our rural isolated youth to conclude
the bill as written sends gambling profits offshore
and strips regions of the support that makes sport possible.
The sport sector certainly does not want to rely on gaming,
however, there is no other current model.
So let's regulate responsibly
and ensure that every dollar spent on gambling continues
to strengthen those communities
who shoulder the social cost.
Thank you. Uh, I just had a question about, um, well,
you've kinda a answered one of my questions,
which was you said,
I think you had a 35% decrease in funding.
Has that been a, a trend
that you've noticed over a a period of time?
Yeah, so when we spoke to the,
the sports organizations last week
and they've, they've talked about a 20 to 50%, um,
decline over the last number of years.
It's, it's quite significant
and the funding has to stretch further
and further as the population grows and,
and sport general growths.
Yeah. Do you think that's
because of, obviously there's cost of living pressures,
but do you think one of the factors might be that, um,
people are moving away from the traditional types
of gambling that have been picked up
and able to have a community purpose?
Is that, do you have any, is there kind
of a link there bet at all?
Sorry, I'm not, I'm not sure.
Um, definitely could be, but I couldn't definitely see it.
No worries. And just the other thing
around the perverse incentive, I think a number
of people brought this up in their submissions, um, just
for me, that I agree with you that, that
that didn't really seem to make that much sense in terms
of if people want to support
community supporting organizations, there's no
barrier to them doing that.
Um, but didn't appear to me,
and I'd be interested to know if you were aware
of any evidence to say
that people were getting into gambling in order to support a
community sport organization.
Yeah, but they're not getting into gambling
to support a community support organization.
Good. Thank you. Thank you for clarifying that.
Um, I can't see any hands up from my colleagues there, so,
and we have actually almost run out of time.
So thank you so much for being here in person.
Really appreciate it and for representing, um,
Mantu here today in Parliament.
Thank you so much. Thank you. All right.
Now we've got a colleague
of yours from Mantu joining us from Bike Mantu.
I think we had Tim there before he joining us on Zoom.
Tim.
Hi. How's things? Good. Thank you.
Welcome to the Governance
and Administration, select Committee Subcommittee.
Thank, we've received for having us.
We've received your submission, uh,
and we've got 10 minutes to hear from you, uh,
today in your oral submission as well.
So, uh, we'll let you, um, decide what you wanna do with
that time, whether you wanna speak, um, to your submission
or, or leave some time for questions. So over to you.
Probably, uh, I mean, Kelly Shanks
and Martin Sand have probably nailed most
of it, uh, that we do.
We deal very closely with Sport Metal too,
and also with Cycling New Zealand, uh, with cycling
with our youth and also with our veterans as well.
And so there has been a massive shortfall in the last,
it's been really, really hard in the last, uh, three years,
basically post COVID, um, to get funding, um, through,
through Pub Charlie and Trillion and, and Lion Foundation.
So one of our big events is the, uh,
six hour challenge at Manfield,
which gives people an opportunity to, to, uh,
ride in a safe environment for six hours effectively.
And that's about getting people
of all ages on bikes in a semi competi um, nature.
Um, a lot of our costs at hiring a venue like Manfield,
for example, have gone up
by probably 150% in the last three years.
Um, all the traffic management fees have gone up
by round about the same.
And without traffic management, without first aid,
without ProMED, we can't operate an event safely.
And if we can't operate events safely,
then we just can't operate.
That's all there is to it.
'cause that's one of our, um,
mentors that we have to stick to.
So yeah, I mean, if there was to be no more, um, funding
through the gambling agencies would be, it'd be very,
very difficult for us to continue as a bike club.
So we're dealing with sport matter too, with, um,
with the program that they have going out to schools,
to getting kids on bikes.
But of course, once you get 'em out on bikes, then teach 'em
how to ride safely, then it's another thing
to take them to the next level.
So, um, goes hand in hand with
where we're with support men or two.
Thank you. Yeah, we did, um, uh,
I think we've had a number of comments from some
of the sporting organizations around the community funding,
which I think you covered similar to, uh, a similar view
to Sportman or to, I just had a, um, question in relation
to another aspect of the bill, which was in relation
to something
that some other submitters have brought up, which is advertising.
Do you have, um, a view on that at all,
or, um, whether that, do you have any concerns around that?
I know it's kind of not exactly the main sub uh, substance
of your submission, but have you considered how
that might impact on some of the young people
who might be participating in some of your, uh, programs?
When we, when we get funding for these, uh,
events from either line or trillion
or, um, you know, pub charity, we certainly do, um,
advertise the fact that it has come from those opera, um,
from those operations.
Um, you know, it goes hand in hand that, you know, we need
to show due diligence with them that we do thank them for
what, what's going on.
But certainly, you know, when there's no wiggle room,
when we go for an event for Manfield, for example, is to,
um, you know, the higher, you know, the higher of the track
or with the first aid, there's no wiggle room with that.
So there's certainly a bottom line
and, um, every, every year we just get there.
And as long as, you know, as well as that with,
with any other profits that we do make, we actually, um,
send that off to Nui Hospice and so it goes hand in hand.
It doesn't just all fall short, just come into us, then we,
you know, provide other charities, um,
which we support from there.
Thank you. We've got a question from Andy Foster.
Look, thank you very much and,
and thank you for what you're, what you're doing.
Um, just a question.
I was, well the thing you mentioned, not only is the,
the revenue going down, but the costs are going up.
And does, do you, are you suggesting that previous to, um,
previous to the, I mean you mentioned traffic rules, um,
which is a matter of great interest to me.
Um, are you suggesting that it was a lot more, uh,
le a lot less safe
before, uh, you had to make these changes?
Or just that the rules and regulations have changed in such
a way that it's much more expensive to run things?
Um, unfortunately, it,
it does vary in a way of traffic things.
Andy, as you probably know from from council to council.
Um, some councils very strict with what they, um, desire
and want and others aren't.
I mean, we're lucky enough to have, you know,
the oo regional council, um, backing us there
and they certainly help us with everything that we can.
Whereas when we, when we come across the Palm North,
not so, uh, when we
District council, then Yeah.
Yeah. So, um, so when we come across the department
or the council, they're not quite as, as, uh, as open
to this sort of thing as we want.
Uh, you go across the warrack
and there's very little traffic management, um, needed.
Anyway, this is a whole other story down. I no, I'll,
I'd be, I'd be interested to traverse that more with you,
but that's where another hat
It will be. Yeah. Yeah.
So all of these costs, every,
every single time we put a traffic management, um,
thing in it's applications, it's, it's $120.
I do it for nothing.
Um, it's, we are incredibly drained with, with,
with volunteer work.
And so if we don't, if the pub charity and,
and if all of the other online gambling, um, income stops,
you know, we're already right at the edge
of people having spare time to come and help us.
And that's only gonna get worse.
No, look, thank you very much for
That. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, Tim.
Um, unless there are any other questions,
um, we'll leave it there.
And just thank you very much for the work that you do
and, uh, for submitting to our committee today.
Thank you very much. Hopefully we get a, uh,
a positive outcome for all of New
Zealanders. Yeah,
that's what we are working as well. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Cheers. Thank you.
So our next, uh, submitters are the Ro Kata
Katoi Music Therapy trust.
We've got, I think Sarah there, Sarah
Kiara.
Kiara, uh, thank you for your written submission
and, uh, for joining us today.
We've got 10 minutes set aside, uh, to hear from you.
Uh, we have had the opportunity to, uh,
read your written submissions
and I do have some colleagues, uh, who are on the Zoom
as well, though you might not be able to see them.
Um, so over to you, KRA.
Thank you so much committee for allowing us
to present today and allowing us to do it via Zoom as well.
Yeah. Uh, I'm here representing Thero,
Kato Music Therapy Trust.
We provide music therapy to people with disabilities
and mental health conditions, uh,
about 900 every week in the Hawkes Bay, Auckland
and Northern Regions.
We employ 22 people.
And you'll be hearing, in fact, I've heard
that you've heard from many charities, I'm sure, who rely
to a greater or lesser extent on the proceeds
of things like lottery commission
and pokies trusts for us at ok.
This is about a quarter of our fundraising income,
and what that represents is over 2000 people
with disabilities or mental health conditions
who are supported through that funding every year.
And like a lot of people, a lot
of groups in the charity sector, we, we do sit uneasily
with the reality that such a high proportion of our income
is derived from what is essentially a harmful practice.
Um, but given the nature
of our work in places like children's respite homes,
prisons, hospitals,
and via referrals from, for example,
we are at least confident that Al Mahi supports a lot
of those who are negatively impacted from gambling.
You'll also be aware that due to economic conditions,
this has been an extremely challenging few months
for us in the charity sector.
You'll be hearing that a lot today.
I am sure, uh, in my decade
or more fundraising in our Tarra 2025 has without doubt been
the most challenging year in that space.
Several of, uh, charities that work in a similar space
to us have closed down this year, which has led
to an increase in demand that we just can't meet.
And this has led to, you know,
when those organizations close down, that leads
to redundancies and negative economic impacts.
Not to mention, of course,
the significant wellbeing impacts on whanau impacted
by disability in our space.
And I'm sure you're also aware
that the charity sector is worth at least 12 billion
to New Zealand's, GDP.
And so all this leads me to reiterate that this legislation,
if it is allowed to progress as it currently is, will enable
a significant increase in online gambling options
for New Zealanders with no attendant requirement
to return a significant portion
of those profits to the community.
And that will cause deep lasting
irreparable harm to New Zealand.
The harm will come in the form of immediate
and significant increased risk to problem gamblers
and the innocent bystanders in their lives.
It'll come in the form of the undercutting of current,
currently legitimate gambling activities in New Zealand
that returns, um, you'll have the better figure,
but at least a hundred million dollars
to communities every year.
It'll come in the subsequent reduction
of charitable funds available overall in this country.
Devastating and already at risk aspect of our economy
that is responsible for approximately 5%
of the workforce in New Zealand.
And virtually the entirety of the volunteering opportunities
that New Zealanders rely on, uh,
including those attempting to reenter the workforce.
And quite a lot of volunteers with us are in that position.
So if this legislation is passed as it is,
the results will be devastating
and we ask in the strongest possible terms
that this bill does not progress
beyond sleep committee stage.
I'm happy to take any questions.
Thank you so much, Sarah.
Thanks for the amazing, um, work that you
and your colleagues do, um, in relation to music therapy
with your, uh, clients around New Zealand.
Um, the question I had is just in relation to, um,
the funding sources that you do have for your, uh, trust.
So obviously a proportion of them are, are through, um, uh,
community grants through gambling.
But what, what's kind of the breakup of
how you can fund this service?
'cause I imagine it's not a service that many of the, um,
end users, um, would be in a position
to fund themselves privately.
Absolutely. So private music therapy is available,
but what we provide is really heavily subsidized music
therapy so that any whanau can access it.
So whanau, the actual cost of a session to us is $156,
but we are asking whanau for as little as $4 a session for
that all the way up to about a hundred dollars a session.
And that's, you know, dependent on the circumstance
of the whanau themselves.
Um, some people aren't paying anything
'cause we're seeing them in a school
or a prison or something like that.
And so it's covered elsewhere in terms of
how our income breaks down.
The client contributions are just under half
and the rest is made up of the vast majority
of the rest is made up of grants.
Um, about a third of which it's a, a quarter
of the overall income, and about a third
of which is from gambling related things, foundation North,
uh, significant supporters,
there are most significant supporters followed by lotteries.
And then there's a lot of local government, uh, funds
that we tap into typically.
And those have been under extreme pressure lately, um, as,
as you'll no doubt be aware.
And then there's various kind of one-off, uh,
public trust administered things.
We obviously have donors, but, uh, the number of donors
and how much they're able to contribute has gone down, um,
as it will have done for, for most in the sector.
Uh, and then we do run events every
now and again when we can.
Obviously events cost a lot to put on.
They don't often yield that much in return more than
what you put into them, but we do do them.
Um, so yeah, so that's roughly how it breaks down.
About 70% of our fundraising is through grants,
and about a third of that is through
gambling related, um, trust.
Thank you. Um, that's, that's really helpful.
I, I just kind of asked that question
because I think it's helpful in terms of, um,
the committee understanding how much
and what the types of activities, the, um, the type,
the grants and the, and the money that are received
through things like lotteries actually,
um, go towards supporting.
The last question I had was really about, um, the way
that money is distributed.
We've had quite a few submissions today talking about the
fact that we should have a mechanism for community funding,
but also, um, a function that works in terms
of distribution of that funding.
And quite a few people have said that, um, having a, uh,
having a mechanism that's similar to
how it currently works at the moment,
but just for online gambling would be sufficient.
What's your experience with that in terms of applying
for funds and grants?
Do you think there's a better way
that, that we could do this?
Or is it is, do you, would you agree with them that
what we have currently is, is kind of good,
but we need more funding behind it?
There's absolutely a better way to do it at the moment.
There is a huge variety in the amount of time and expertise
and knowledge it takes to apply for a grant end
to end the application.
And accountability for a grant might take me, uh, who,
who's been doing this as a job for nearly a decade, um,
and, you know, is fluent English and grew up in this context
and all of that kind of thing can take me anywhere from a
minimum of two hours all the way up to 30 plus hours
to go end to end with a grants process.
They are extremely inconsistent in what they require.
Um, the onus on the applicant is extreme,
and what that means is that the bigger the charity, uh,
the more staff they have, the more likely they are
to be successful has been in operation since 2004.
I am the first person with this job of applying for grants
that has worked here, um,
because it hasn't been in position to be able to afford it.
Uh, and a huge amount
of charities are obviously still in that position.
Um, it's, it really locks out a lot of great initiatives
and it is not an even playing field.
Um, it needs significant reform.
There is definitely better ways that we can be doing this.
Thank you so much. Really appreciate that.
Um, thank you for your time today
and, um, for speaking to the committee
and answering our questions.
Yeah, Thanks. Thank you.
We'll move now on to our next submitter
who we've got joining us, um, by Zoom.
And so we've got the, uh,
Wellington North Badminton Association Incorporated.
And so I understand we've got Dave
and Richard, is that correct?
That's right. So I'm the chair of our board
and Richard is our general manager
and he's here to answer the difficult questions.
Fantastic. Well, good to have you both here.
We do have a copy of your written submission,
but um, we've got 10 minutes to discuss that with you,
so over to you.
Okay. So just a bit of, I, I'll be fairly short,
but, um, we're a regional sports organization
in the Wellington North area.
Uh, in the 1990s we built
and continue to own our own six court badminton hall.
And the hall is used by our two
and a half thousand members for various things like club
play, events, training,
and, um, they also casually hire it from us as well.
Um, we are managed by a six person board,
a full-time manager, and six part-time staff members
or thereabouts, changes from time to time.
Um, the utilize, we've got very high utilization.
Um, so the utilization of our hall, uh, between the hours
of 8:00 AM and midnight seven days a week is around 80%,
which is sort of pretty much at our maximum.
Um, our, our revenue is in the order of 600,000
and about 70,000 of this is
provided by grant funding.
Um, the funding has contributed to
and allows us to carry out significant maintenance items,
um, to pay our staff and to support our junior players.
Um, over the years we have aimed to try
and reduce our reliance on grant funding.
Um, we didn't want to be subject
to it being cut off from us.
Um, and we are now in a position where degradation
of this funding, 'cause we, we have got to the,
I guess the last bits that we think we can cope
with at our size without having to, um,
uh, degrade our, um, services.
Um, so degradation would result in a reduction in services
and, um, and,
and probably reduction in members as well as bought is good
for the body and the soul.
Um, as you can tell from these two people in front of you,
we provide these services for the good of the community.
Um, and as a result of this proposed legislation, we concern
that the revenue that we
and other like-minded organizations are currently receiving
will be directed away from us
and lost in the consolidated fund.
And that's, uh, that's what I've gotta say.
So yeah, open to you for questions.
Thank you. Uh, I, I've looked over your submission
and seen, um, the, the financial information in the table
that you've put in there in terms of the grants funding.
Um, I just wanted to just give you an opportunity to just,
uh, let us know the kind
of messages that you want us to take from that.
It looks to me like you had a big dip in funding in 2023,
um, but have had a kind of significantly increased, um,
amount or at least in grants in in 2024.
Is it, is it, I understand your point around
reliance on grants,
but um, just can you explain at all the discrepancy
There? Yeah, so
it does tend to vary.
It depends on what is happening at the time, um, and,
and when funds are allocated.
So recently we, um, spent quite a lot of money on our, um,
roof and we got funding for that.
So we got a a, a good chunk of funding for that.
But that then, um, changes the timing,
I guess, in terms of whether it happened in
one year or another year.
Um, perhaps I'll get Richard
to elaborate a little bit more on that.
Yeah, so in 20 20, 24, we did have a, we did have some, uh,
grant funding from towards the roof.
Um, not typically a funder we apply to only for,
um, sort of bigger, bigger capital items.
So, uh, yes, we did get a, um, a decent grant from lotteries
that year, but it was allocated to a project that isn't sort
of our day to day activity.
Um, most of our funding we receive, um, you know,
does go towards staff wages, events
and sports equipment, um, primarily,
and yes, it does vary from time to time depending on, um,
cutoffs for funders
and also the, uh, timeframes of when they've last,
uh, given you a successful grant.
Um, sometimes there's some grant funders
that will only give you one a year.
Um, and then there's some that might be three
or four times a year, and it just really depends on the
cycle, uh, the cycle of that as well.
Um, yeah, so I mean, we are, we are expecting 2025, um,
you know, we are resigned to the fact
that our funding will be down on 2020 fourth.
Um, but we still are really reliant on it
to run our programs and our events, um,
and run our association.
So you think you'd definitely benefit from a, uh,
if there was more money available for grants
that would assist you with your operations?
Absolutely, yes. Yeah. Yeah. Okay.
Thank you so much for joining us today,
and we appreciate your, um, written submission
and the information that you, that you gave us.
So thank you very much for your time.
Okay, thank you. Thanks. Take care. Okay.
You too. Bye-bye. Um, so we don't,
I think we're running a little bit early,
so we don't have our next submitter,
but we might, uh, move to see,
I think we've got the New Zealand Mountain Safety Council.
Yes, Mike? Yep. Yeah.
Are you, would you like to do your submission now?
Yes. I'm gonna throw In my out No, you, you won't be,
be helpful for us just to make sure
that we utilize our time if that's like a chair
or, yeah, just if you sit just in that middle one there.
I know it seems like a slightly unusual, um,
setup in the room, but we do have people watching on Zoom
and, um, the cameras pick up set
for set, set up for certain seats.
So, um, I appreciate, um, you being there.
Um, thank you so much for your time
and for joining us in person.
Do have a copy of your written submission
and we do have 10 minutes to hear from you today.
So over to you if you'd like to make some comments.
And then we'll see if there's
any questions from the committee.
Good. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, so as you would've picked up from the submission, uh,
MEC from the first principles level actually supports the,
the implementation of the bill, um, in terms of
what it's seeking to achieve,
of regulating something which is currently unregulated
and with, you know, trying to keep as best possible
as legislation can, uh, with changes in patterns of,
of people's behavior.
So people want to, uh, use gambling as an activity and, um,
and enjoy that activity.
Um, and, but are currently starting
to shift into online modes and, and,
and changes in patterns there.
So it's a good thing for legislation
to try and keep pace with that.
Um, but the core of our submission in terms of, uh,
the potential unintended consequences of not returning some
of those profits back from, from
that gabo gambling industry back into communities
as it currently does across, as you would know,
across the other, other gambling acts, um,
will have some unintended consequences.
And, and for us, uh, just trying to put
that into some context, um,
at Mountain Safety Council every year, our core funding,
we do get some funding, uh, for particular pieces
of work, uh, that we implement.
Uh, but our core funding has,
has traditionally come from the Valerie Grants board
for the outdoor safety, uh, committee.
Um, and that's been a, quite a, a long term, uh,
in investment into the organization.
So that's typically in the scale of one
and a half million a year.
It varies, but, um, and it hasn't really grown.
But, and, and one of the, we'll come back to it,
but one of the key reasons of why it hasn't grown is there's
been no, no growth of investment into lotteries.
Um, but just to give you a sense of, of, of what
that potential unintended conduct, for instance could be,
is unlike most of the organizations that we intersect with
around the world, uh, that, that do similar things
to the Mount Safety Council, um,
are funded directly from government.
Um, and, and New Zealand is, is not an absolute exception,
um, but that the system of funding to our core operations
that we've enjoyed for, for decades has been via lotteries.
Um, and so changes within that system can, uh, you know,
and have an unintended impact on that.
And it give you a sense of scale of, of
what we have achieved, particularly in the last decade in
terms of your a real strong public, uh, interface
and a, in a, in a, in a demonstratable, uh,
change in patterns of behavior
that have improved safety in the outdoors
for the general public that are recreating.
Um, we've got a whole suite of digital tools that people,
um, that utilize to, to, to inform themselves
and better inform themselves,
have a great time in the outdoors, but do it more safely.
Uh, tools like Plan My Walk, uh, 750,000, uh, plus,
uh, annual users of, of that digital tool in terms
of helping people plan, uh, their trips, look at the trips
and make sure that their, their
activities aligned to their skills.
And it sounds really simple,
but it enables people to make, uh, their,
their trips more enjoyable, but safer.
And all of these things
through our evidence base can be attributed
to a reduction in search and rescue.
So we can empirically demonstrate
where we've put these interventions in place.
There's been significantly less search and rescue, um,
and a general pattern of behavior change,
positive behavior change in terms of safer behavior.
So reduction in funding into that proven system, uh,
would we believe empirically turn that around, um,
and you would an increase in cost to the search
and rescue system and through a CC in terms
of wider injury systems.
So the, the core
of it here is it's potentially an unintended consequence.
Consequence, um, and just our submission was, was two parts.
One, support for the general principle.
Um, but this, this principle of returning some of
that profit back to communities has worked
for New Zealand very well.
It's worked for, if you've heard a bunch of organizations,
I'm sure from different parts of the sports sector
and recreation and art sector.
Um, but in terms of, we felt the importance
to submit in person around this public safety, uh, element
that may not be aware to, to the, the people involved in,
in constructing this bill.
Uh, so the short version is the investment
that currently comes from lottery could be undermined
as people, if, if the current trend to people moving
to online gambling continues
potentially there would be less investment going
through the current system that exists within New Zealand,
particularly through lotto.
Um, and that has a direct impact on our ability to,
to deliver initiatives to the public that have proven to,
to improve people's safety.
Thank you. I've, I've got a question from Andy, but just
before he jumps in.
Um, I was quite surprised to see that you received most
of your funding through grants.
Uh, unlike a lot of the other organizations we've had submit
to, uh, the committee today, I suppose yours,
your work is not recreational, it's to assist public safety.
And so that's, um, that makes it somewhat more unusual.
Uh, so just in terms of the funding that you've got, this,
I see that you put in your written submission
around the 1.5 million that you receive,
do you get other funding sources
to support your work in addition to that?
Or what are, what are kind of funding streams that,
that you rely on to do your work?
Good point. So going back to your opening point, there is,
is most, uh, particularly, uh, the political system.
So assume the first two things they'll say you get funding
from Doc Department of Conservation or acc mm-hmm.
Um, and, and neither of those two things,
uh, are true or have been.
Mm-hmm. Um, so our core, we,
we have an avalanche advisory, so it's a public,
there's a super short version of that as a, as a, a system
that enables back country Alpine users to understand
where avalanche risks and hazards will,
will impact on, on them.
Um, and so that is funded through
by the Ministry of Transport.
Okay. Um, but that's the only, only element
of government funding that is,
that comes into the organization
and it's, yeah, the outdoor safety committee
that was established as part of the lottery grants board.
I dunno if you are aware in terms of that's a, it's, it's a,
it's a fairly solid system.
Mm-hmm. Um, but as I touched on earlier, one
of the key rationales is, is to, we can demonstrate the,
the tools and, and,
and interventions we're building, we can do more of that.
We can amplify that significantly,
but we are restricted with funds.
So we, our, our application is always, uh,
significantly higher than what we receive.
And one of the key things
that comes back from the outdoor safety committee is they
have no further funds to allocate.
Um, so it's a two, two part thing is that it's if
an increase into it.
So more online gambling is another opportunity for people,
new revenues to come into the system and,
and through a mechanism, if the bill is, is, is changed
to accommodate that could allow more investment
to come into organizations like this for public safety.
Just, just a final supplementary before we go to Andy.
Is there, are there other organizations
that do similar work to you?
So kind of outside that we've heard from cultural
institutions today, we've heard from sporting organizations,
um, kind of community groups,
but, um, any, any others that work kind of directly in
harm prevention or public safety that you're aware of?
Uh, a bit of no. And yes,
so Water Safety New Zealand is probably our,
it's our sister organization.
Um, and they, they're the closest to
what we do here in New Zealand.
That's, that's not diminishing the impact
that other organizations do in terms of prevention.
You good humans are in, in many organizations, department
of Conservation, um,
and a range of organizations all do elements of prevention.
So we're not unique.
We don't do everything across the,
the outdoor safety prevention space.
Uh, but we are the only,
we are the only organization in New Zealand that focuses,
you know, a hundred percent of our time on just preventing,
um, so land search
and rescue for instance, you know, they,
they're also decent humans.
Um, they've not only come and look for you, but they'll try
and encourage people to, to do better behaviors as well.
But we are the only organization a
hundred percent focused on it.
Thank you, Andy. Yeah.
Look, Mike, thank you so much for what you do.
I haven't yet had to avail myself of your services, but,
or san or search and rescue services I should say.
But I was interested, um, in your comment
that you could do empirically show that the, the money
that you're investing in better systems, et cetera,
saves money in the search and rescue area.
Yeah, yeah. What kind of,
what kind of numbers are we looking at?
Um, and so there's been a, a series of, of high,
what we call 'em, hotspots in internally.
So we've built specific interventions
for those particular tracks and trails.
Um, and on those particular set of trails, there's a high,
high participation or high
consequence trails around New Zealand.
Um, I don't dunno quite where to look.
Sorry, I'm looking at where I can see you, Andy. Um, that's
Okay. I, I, I can cope
by the way you look,
if you look straight at the camera, you, you look,
look, whatever, whatever sits you,
I can see you down here. Oh yeah.
So we can, we can point to at least a third
to up to a 50% reduction in those places
where those interventions have been put in place on,
on the numbers of search and rescues per year.
So a third to a half, um,
where we've done direct interventions in place.
And, um, so that's, that's, that's quite a powerful thing.
Um, and, and what pleasingly, we've seen those,
those numbers stay down.
Um, we've seen other areas of work in terms of, excuse me,
hunter education where, uh, say the opening weekend
of the duck shooting season, um, incidents surrounding
that, that activity have gone to near zero, uh,
because of direct interventions we, we've had.
So again, we can, we can measure this empirically over time.
And so, sorry, just to follow up, uh, um,
can you put a dollar number on that or a life
or a life number on that? You know,
There's a, there's a number that goes around, um,
most countries where they create a cost of life.
Uh, it's just, I dunno,
now it's gone completely outta my head, but it's, it's,
I think, I think we, we keep on flicking from,
we're now flick from I think four a
bit to 12 or something like that. But yeah,
So there's that plus, um, a CC can track in terms
of the level of significant injuries
that are potentially reduced, uh,
because of the interventions.
Um, but again, we, we point back to the fact
that funding has been flat for so many years that we can,
we can also frustratingly point
to if we had more investment, we could do more of this.
Mm-hmm.
Okay. No, thank you. Thank you.
That's really, um, interesting
and a bit alarm to hear, to hear, um, that there,
there is such a shortfall of
funding and such an important area.
So thank you so much for the work that you do
and for coming in today and for your submission.
Thank you. Thank you so much. Thank you.
We've got our last submitter, um,
for this part of the session.
Before we go onto our break,
now we've got the Dunedin Coral Society who's
joining us by Zoom.
Yeah,
Deborah, we can just, we can see
just the top of your head there.
All right. Thank you. Um, yes, and,
and I now, I, I now can't see you,
so I'll, I'll, I'll just talk.
Um, can you see more of me now?
No worries. Yeah. Uh, a little bit less,
but, um, look, it's no problem at all.
The important thing is that we can hear you perfectly well.
So, um, welcome to the committee and we have received Thank
You very much. And I'm, I'm
very sorry I can't see you.
I, I was, uh, sorted out and,
and then I got another message saying
to, to do something else.
So I have, nevermind.
I'm, I'm, um, uh, president of Dunedin Coral Society
and along with New Zealand Coral Society wish to make, um,
our submission, which we have.
And to give you a, um, presentation, we, we support
and principle the principles of, of the bill
to regulate online operators
and have a clear licensing process
and make for the, a safer gambling market addressing,
of course, the harm mini minimalization.
But what is really concerning to us is
that there's no requirement for those online operators
to return any share of their revenue to the community
as is required of the venue operators.
You, you'll be aware,
it's a thought $170 million currently flows from the machine
operators, and this will reduce significantly if
and up to, uh, when 15 online operators are licensed.
All New Zealanders,
we contend benefit from the current venue operating
community funding.
They vary from the very young to the very senior of us.
Every ethnicity with focus on Maori
and Pacifica through the arts, sport, health
education environment.
I, I've just heard the previous submitter, um, health
and safety religion
and all other cultural groups, the sports stem, um,
representatives have dominated the media reaction
to this unintended consequences.
But it, it, uh, extends far further than just the sports.
Countless New Zealanders, I'm one of them, have donated
countless hours and energy for the community, um,
voluntary sector and for not-for-profit activities.
It, it's, it would be hard for me to put, um,
a quantitative quantify the hours I've spent
and the dollars I've given fundraising is, is nonstop
funding restrictions
and further a loss in even the ability to apply for funding
is a really challenging situation.
So, speaking now more of my own sector, um,
the choir achieves about 15 to 20%
of our income each year through community funding.
Our, it's, yes, our expenses are enormous.
We, we, the choir members themselves do not benefit
directly from any funding who benefits is the, um,
our community, the audience,
because we can then subsidize our ticket prices,
ev even allowing members who, who cannot afford it to,
um, attend our conferences, uh, concerts, um,
without charge funding applications
are an enormous task.
It's competitive, it's discretionary.
We don't always get it.
And neither will any of the other groups.
Um, the, the, uh, we, we employ professional musicians
as, as do many
of the sports groups would employ
professional sports people.
The, the flow on effects of funding are really significant.
And all our, all these groups, sports, arts,
performing theater, comedians, authors, writers,
all these, all these different groups are aiming
for sustainable, long-term and strategic futures.
We, we maintain that to have healthy
and enthusiastic, positive, friendly, engaged,
and inspired communities,
and those with good mental health, we, we need this level
of funding to help sustain all these different groups.
So Dunedin's Coral Society urges
the legislation for this online operators to have added
to the proposals to contribute a fixed
and significant proportion of their gross gambling revenue.
Please, for the benefit of the community.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Debra, for your submission.
Uh, I just wanted to ask you, um,
I've seen about the shortfall
and your funding from what you've said
and what's in your written submission,
but I just wanted to know, has that got worse
or better for you in the last few years?
Uh, it's got significantly harder, significantly harder.
We, we to cut out one whole concert a year,
we can only afford to perform on the magnificent acoustics
of the Dunedin Town Hall once a year.
Um, the, the, the costs are just growing and growing,
and yet we want to provide a, a, a significant
artistic live performance opportunities for our communities
as, as do all, all the arts.
It's, it, it is a real struggle.
Thank you. Sorry to hear that.
But thank you for your, for your answer.
I do have a question from Andy Foster. Thank
You. Yeah,
Thank you.
Um, just a question about the, the grants process.
'cause we've had a number of people, and I'm fam very
familiar with that myself, uh, on a personal basis.
Ha do you find it particularly difficult?
Um, could it be made easier?
Is it very variable in terms of the amount of time
and effort and information, et cetera, you've gotta provide,
uh, to different, uh, different funding organizations?
Um, I, I have, I've been president
of Dunedin Coral Society for 25 years, so I am very,
very familiar with writing applications
and I have a good process.
Um, I do spend a lot of time and energy, um,
before even committing to a, um, um, an online application
or a, um, hard copy application in thinking strategically
about what our key, um, goals are for each different concert
and who else we might be providing.
So it, it requires a lot of, a lot more mental thought,
I think, in, in order to be successful.
And I can say I have been reasonably successful,
probably very successful over the years,
but the number of venue operators is shrinking, um,
already and has done, and particularly over the last seven
or eight years, and the thought that
further venue operators will go and on
and be replaced by these online operators
where we are not promised any further funding,
um, to come.
And I, I don't mean we personally, I'm, I mean the,
the community sector sector, yeah.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Um, is, is really very, very concerning. Yeah.
No, look, thank you very much for that.
But, um, actually, you asked the question,
could it be made simpler?
Yes. I'm, I'm not sure if it could,
because it's such a discretionary and competitive market.
If, if it's too easy, um, the applications
and don't require, um, in depth
and significant, uh, input, I'm not sure that
anybody in the end will benefit.
And always, is it better, better to benefit a few,
slightly more significantly or lots by little amounts?
And that's, that's a dilemma
and all sorts of aspects of our lives, isn't it? Yes.
Yeah. No, I was thinking more about the process
of getting it there, but thank you. Yep.
Thank you so much, Deborah.
Uh, we really appreciate you being with us today
and for your written and oral submission.
Also. Thank you, uh, very much for the work that you do, um,
in the Dunedin community. Thank,
Thank you very Much. And as well, we,
I'm sure it's much appreciated.
Thank you. Thank you,
Deborah.
Thank you. All right, colleagues, that was our last, um,
submitter for this part of the section.
So we will, uh, now suspend the meeting
until 2:55 PM this afternoon.
I.